RULES.md, before:

# Shift Scheduler Rules and Behavior

This document defines the expected behavior and rules for the Shift Scheduler application. Use this specification when prompting AI tools and when implementing or reviewing scheduling logic.

## Context for the Application
**Purpose:** The Python application generates a shift schedule for 15 workers across all ISO weeks (Monday to Sunday) that include any day of a selected month. For example, for September 2025, the program schedules all complete ISO weeks containing any day in September, including days outside September (e.g., the last week includes October 1–5, 2025, covering ISO week 40 from September 29 to October 5). The results are visualized based on the calendar weeks of the chosen month, but scheduling is strictly based on complete ISO weeks (Monday to Sunday).

**Handling Overlapping Weeks:** If a week (e.g., September 29–October 5, 2025) has already been scheduled in a previous run (e.g., when scheduling September 2025), the program must not reschedule that week when scheduling a subsequent month (e.g., October 2025). Instead, it loads the previously assigned shifts for that week and only schedules the remaining unscheduled ISO weeks for the new month (e.g., for October 2025, schedule ISO weeks starting from October 6, with the last week being October 27–November 2, 2025).
- *Clarification:* "Already scheduled" means any assignment exists for an ISO week (year, week) in persistent history. Such weeks are excluded from optimization and their historical assignments are merged into the output for visualization within the selected month.

**Worker Types:** There are two types of workers:
- Workers with a standard weekly load of 12 hours.
- Workers with a standard weekly load of 18 hours.
- Both types can work overtime (hours beyond their standard weekly load).
- Some workers cannot work nights (they are identified).

**Shift Types:** There are three shifts per day:
- **M1:** 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM (12 hours).
- **M2:** 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM (15 hours).
- **N:** 8:00 PM to 8:00 AM (12 hours, night shift).

**Timezone and DST:** Assume local timezone and fixed shift durations. Ignore DST anomalies (e.g., 23- or 25-hour nights); treat N as 12 hours consistently.

## Program Characteristics
**Vacation Weeks:** A week is considered a vacation week for a worker if they have no available weekdays (Monday to Friday) in that ISO week for scheduling.
- Special days (e.g., holidays) that fall on weekdays (Monday to Friday) are treated as weekend days when calculating long-term weekend shift equity across the year.
- *Clarification:* Holidays on weekdays are still considered weekdays for vacation week determination.

**Tracking Features:**
- The application tracks each worker’s shift history, overtime (hours worked beyond their standard weekly load of 12 or 18 hours), and undertime (hours worked below their standard weekly load of 12 or 18 hours).

## Critical Rules
These rules must be strictly enforced in the shift scheduling logic:

**Shift Assignment:**
- There are 3 shifts per day (M1, M2, N), and each shift must be assigned to exactly one worker.
- No shift can be left without a worker assigned.

**Worker Availability:**
- Workers’ unavailable days must be respected (i.e., they cannot be scheduled on those days).

**Shift Intervals:**
- There must be at least a 24-hour interval from the end of one shift to the start of the next shift assigned to the same worker.
- *Clarification:* The interval is measured from the actual end time of one shift to the start time of the next shift for the same worker.
- *Cross-Month Application:* When scheduling a new month, historical assignments from the end of the previous scheduling window must be loaded to enforce the 24-hour interval for shifts at the beginning of the new window.
- *Examples:*
   - N (20:00–08:00) → next-day M1/M2/N is allowed (≥24h rest).
   - M1 (08:00–20:00) → next-day N (20:00–08:00) is allowed (exactly 24h rest).
   - M1 (08:00–20:00) → next-day M1/M2 is not allowed (12–15h rest).

**Night Shift Restrictions:**
- Workers who cannot work nights must never be assigned the night shift (N).

**Daily Shift Exclusions:**
- The same worker cannot be assigned more than one shift on the same day.

**Weekly Participation:**
- All workers who have at least one available weekday (Monday to Friday) in a given ISO week must be assigned at least one shift during that ISO week.
- *Clarification:* Workers with zero weekday availability are exempt from weekly participation, but may still be assigned weekend shifts if needed to satisfy critical rules.

**Weekday Shift Distribution:**
- On weekdays (Monday to Friday), ensure that all workers with at least one available weekday in the ISO week are assigned at least one weekday shift before any worker is assigned a second weekday shift in that ISO week.
- *Clarification:* Holidays that fall on weekdays are treated as weekdays (a shift on a holiday satisfies the "at least one weekday shift" requirement).

**Infeasibility Handling:**
- If critical rules cannot be satisfied (e.g., insufficient available workers), the solver reports the instance as infeasible rather than violating critical rules. Flexible rules may be relaxed, but critical rules must always hold.

## Flexible Rules (In Order of Importance)
These rules should be satisfied as much as possible, in the order listed, but may be compromised if necessary to meet the critical rules:

1. **Saturday Priority for First Shift:**
   - Priority should be given to assigning each worker's first shift of the ISO week on a weekday (Monday to Friday), even if it's a holiday. If this is not possible for some workers, prioritize assigning them a Saturday instead of Sunday, and a M1 or M2 shift instead of a N shift, as their first shift.
   - **Important:** During three-day weekends (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday), the Saturday/Sunday penalties are **suspended** to avoid conflicting with the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization" rule (#2). Workers whose first shift falls on a Saturday or Sunday during a 3-day weekend receive no penalty, allowing the optimizer to freely concentrate shifts to fewer workers.
   - *Fallback Order (highest to lowest):*
      1) Weekday day shift (M1/M2), even if it's a holiday.
      2) Weekday night shift (N), even if it's a holiday.
      3) Saturday day shift (M1/M2).
      4) Saturday night shift (N).
      5) Sunday day shift (M1/M2).
      6) Sunday night shift (N).

2. **Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization:**
   - When a holiday on a Monday or Friday creates a three-day weekend (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday), prioritize minimizing the number of different workers assigned shifts over those three days by favoring multiple shifts to the same worker, provided the 24-hour interval between shifts is respected.
   - *Clarification:* The goal is to minimize the number of *unique* workers assigned to the 3-day period. Fewer workers is better. Ideally, one worker covers as much as possible if legal.
   - *Cross-Month Application:* This rule applies even when the three-day weekend spans two calendar months (e.g., Saturday the 30th, Sunday the 31st, and a Monday holiday on the 1st of the next month; or a Friday holiday on the 31st followed by Saturday the 1st and Sunday the 2nd). When scheduling the earlier month, if the following month's 1st is a known holiday on Monday, the optimizer should consider the full three-day period. Similarly, when scheduling the later month, historical assignments from the preceding weekend days (already scheduled in the previous month's run) must be loaded and factored into minimizing unique workers for the three-day period.

3. **Weekend Shift Limits:**
   - Avoid assigning the same worker two shifts in the same weekend (Saturday and Sunday), even if "Shift Intervals" is not broken.
   - **Important:** This rule is **completely disabled** for any weekend that is part of a three-day weekend (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday due to a holiday). When a three-day weekend exists, the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization" rule (#2) takes precedence, and this rule does not apply at all to that weekend. This ensures the optimizer can freely assign multiple shifts to the same worker to minimize the total number of unique workers working the three-day period.
   - *Cross-Month Application:* When a weekend spans two calendar months (e.g., Saturday the 31st and Sunday the 1st), this rule still applies (unless it's a three-day weekend). When scheduling the later month, historical assignments from the Saturday (already scheduled in the previous month's run) must be loaded to enforce this limit.

4. **Consecutive Weekend Shift Avoidance:**
   - Avoid assigning a worker shifts on consecutive weekends if there are other workers who have not yet worked a weekend shift in that month.
   - *Clarification:* "In that month" refers strictly to the current calendar month being scheduled. However, the check for "consecutive" must look back at the last weekend of the previous month/week to determine if the current weekend is consecutive.

5. **Consecutive Shifts:**
   - Aim to schedule shifts such that the time interval between the end of one shift and the start of the next shift for the same worker is greater than 48 hours, whenever this does not conflict with any critical rules or higher-priority flexible rules (like the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization").
   - *Cross-Month Application:* When scheduling a new month, historical assignments from the end of the previous month must be considered to compute the interval to the first shift in the new scheduling window.

6. **Night Shift Minimum Interval:**
   - Avoid scheduling night shifts with 48 hours or less between them (measured start-to-start). If a worker does a night shift on day 1, they should not do another night shift on day 3 or sooner.
   - *Clarification:* The interval is measured from the start time of one night shift to the start time of the next night shift for the same worker. This applies to all night shifts, including those in three-day weekends.
   - *Example:* Night shift on Monday 20:00 → next night shift should be no earlier than Thursday 20:00 (96h later) to fully avoid penalty, or at least after Wednesday 20:00 (48h) to partially reduce the penalty.

7. **Consecutive Night Shift Avoidance:**
   - When a worker is assigned a night shift, avoid having their next assigned shift also be a night shift. The goal is to prevent "night-to-night" sequences where a worker's shifts alternate between nights without any day shifts in between.
   - *Clarification:* This rule applies regardless of the number of days between the shifts. If a worker does a night shift on Monday and their next shift is on Thursday, that Thursday shift should preferably NOT be a night shift.
   - *Penalty Reduction:* The penalty is reduced if the start times of the two consecutive night shifts are separated by at least 96 hours (4 days). This allows for longer rest periods to partially compensate for back-to-back night assignments.
   - *Example:* Worker does N on Monday (20:00) → next shift on Wednesday should be M1 or M2, not N. If it must be N, having it on Friday (96h+ later) is better than Thursday (72h later).

8. **Shift Equity:**
   - Shifts should be distributed equitably among workers over the year, with different shift types having different equity priority (higher priority = more important to balance first).
   - *Equity Priority Order (highest to lowest):*
      1) Sunday or Holiday M2
      2) Saturday N
      3) Saturday M2
      4) Sunday or Holiday N (holidays on Saturday excluded—see below)
      5) Sunday or Holiday M1
      6) Saturday M1
      7) Weekday N (all Mon-Fri nights combined, to balance total night burden)
      8) Friday N
      9) Weekday (not Friday) N
      10) Monday M1 or M2
      11) Weekday (not Monday) M1 or M2

   - *Holiday Counting Rules for Equity:*
      - Holiday on Saturday: M1/M2 count as Holiday M1/M2; N counts as Saturday N (not double-counted).
      - Holiday on Sunday: counts in the "Sunday or Holiday" category.
      - Holiday on a weekday (Mon–Fri): counts in the "Sunday or Holiday" category for equity purposes.
   - *Clarification:* Equity metrics are computed over the entire year-to-date, incorporating historical assignments from previous months.

9. **M2 Priority:**
   - Prioritize M2 shifts over M1 shifts for workers with a standard weekly load of 18 hours to minimize overtime over the long term (one year of scheduling).
   - *Clarification:* Prefer assigning M2 over M1 to workers with an 18-hour weekly load when both are feasible. This does not prohibit assigning M2 to 12-hour workers, especially when needed to satisfy critical rules.

10. **Weekend Definition for Behavioral Rules:**
   - For rules such as **Weekend Shift Limits** (#3) and **Consecutive Weekend Shift Avoidance** (#4), only actual weekends (Saturday and Sunday) are considered "weekend."
   - Holidays falling on weekdays (Monday–Friday) do NOT count as weekend for these behavioral rules—they only affect equity tracking (#6).

## Extended Absence Handling

**Automatic Equity Credits for Extended Absences:**
When workers are absent for extended periods (medical leave, parental leave, prolonged vacations), their equity stat counts fall behind other workers. Without adjustment, the scheduler would try to "catch up" these workers by assigning them more undesirable shifts upon return, which is unfair to workers who covered during the absence.

**Automatic Detection and Credit Application:**
The scheduler automatically detects workers with 3 or more consecutive weeks of full unavailability and applies equity credits to compensate:

- **Detection Criteria:** A worker is considered to have an "extended absence" if they have 3+ consecutive ISO weeks where all 5 weekdays (Monday-Friday) are marked as unavailable.
- **Automatic Credits:** Credits are calculated based on the number of consecutive weeks absent, approximating what shifts the worker would have been assigned if available.
- **No Manual Intervention Required:** Simply mark the worker as unavailable for the extended period, and the system handles the rest.

**How It Works:**
1. Before schedule generation, the system scans each worker's unavailability data
2. If 3+ consecutive weeks of full weekday unavailability are detected, credits are automatically calculated:
   - ~1 credit per 15 weeks for Saturday/Sunday/Holiday shifts (sat_n, sun_holiday_m2, etc.)
   - ~1 credit per 5 weeks for night shifts (fri_night, weekday_not_fri_n)
   - ~1 credit per 2 weeks for common weekday shifts (weekday_not_mon_day)
3. Credits are added to the worker's apparent past stats during optimization
4. This prevents the scheduler from over-assigning undesirable shifts to "catch up"

**Example:**
Sofia goes on 4-week parental leave (marked unavailable Mon-Fri for 4 consecutive weeks):
- System automatically detects the extended absence
- Applies credits: sat_n=0, weekday_not_mon_day=2, etc.
- When Sofia returns, she won't be overloaded with Saturday nights or holiday shifts

**Manual Override:**
Administrators can still manually set or adjust credits via SchedulerService if the automatic calculation needs fine-tuning:
```python
scheduler.set_worker_equity_credit("Sofia", "sat_n", 1)  # Add 1 Saturday night credit
scheduler.clear_worker_equity_credits("Sofia")  # Clear all manual credits for worker
```

**Configuration Persistence:**
Manual equity credit overrides are saved in `config.yaml` under the `equity_credits` key and persist across sessions. Automatic credits are computed fresh each time based on current unavailability data.


**Data Schema Recommendations:**
- Worker: { id, name, weekly_load: 12|18, can_night: bool, unavailable_dates: Set[YYYY-MM-DD] }
- Shift: { date: YYYY-MM-DD, type: M1|M2|N, start: HH:MM, end: HH:MM }
- History: keyed by (iso_year, iso_week), storing assigned shifts per day and per worker, plus weekly hour totals, overtime, and undertime.

Commit message:

Add monthly shift balance rules to prevent extreme imbalances in shift assignments

RULES.md, after:

# Shift Scheduler Rules and Behavior

This document defines the expected behavior and rules for the Shift Scheduler application. Use this specification when prompting AI tools and when implementing or reviewing scheduling logic.

## Context for the Application
**Purpose:** The Python application generates a shift schedule for 15 workers across all ISO weeks (Monday to Sunday) that include any day of a selected month. For example, for September 2025, the program schedules all complete ISO weeks containing any day in September, including days outside September (e.g., the last week includes October 1–5, 2025, covering ISO week 40 from September 29 to October 5). The results are visualized based on the calendar weeks of the chosen month, but scheduling is strictly based on complete ISO weeks (Monday to Sunday).

**Handling Overlapping Weeks:** If a week (e.g., September 29–October 5, 2025) has already been scheduled in a previous run (e.g., when scheduling September 2025), the program must not reschedule that week when scheduling a subsequent month (e.g., October 2025). Instead, it loads the previously assigned shifts for that week and only schedules the remaining unscheduled ISO weeks for the new month (e.g., for October 2025, schedule ISO weeks starting from October 6, with the last week being October 27–November 2, 2025).
- *Clarification:* "Already scheduled" means any assignment exists for an ISO week (year, week) in persistent history. Such weeks are excluded from optimization and their historical assignments are merged into the output for visualization within the selected month.

**Worker Types:** There are two types of workers:
- Workers with a standard weekly load of 12 hours.
- Workers with a standard weekly load of 18 hours.
- Both types can work overtime (hours beyond their standard weekly load).
- Some workers cannot work nights (they are identified).

**Shift Types:** There are three shifts per day:
- **M1:** 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM (12 hours).
- **M2:** 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM (15 hours).
- **N:** 8:00 PM to 8:00 AM (12 hours, night shift).

**Timezone and DST:** Assume local timezone and fixed shift durations. Ignore DST anomalies (e.g., 23- or 25-hour nights); treat N as 12 hours consistently.

## Program Characteristics
**Vacation Weeks:** A week is considered a vacation week for a worker if they have no available weekdays (Monday to Friday) in that ISO week for scheduling.
- Special days (e.g., holidays) that fall on weekdays (Monday to Friday) are treated as weekend days when calculating long-term weekend shift equity across the year.
- *Clarification:* Holidays on weekdays are still considered weekdays for vacation week determination.

**Tracking Features:**
- The application tracks each worker’s shift history, overtime (hours worked beyond their standard weekly load of 12 or 18 hours), and undertime (hours worked below their standard weekly load of 12 or 18 hours).

## Critical Rules
These rules must be strictly enforced in the shift scheduling logic:

**Shift Assignment:**
- There are 3 shifts per day (M1, M2, N), and each shift must be assigned to exactly one worker.
- No shift can be left without a worker assigned.

**Worker Availability:**
- Workers’ unavailable days must be respected (i.e., they cannot be scheduled on those days).

**Shift Intervals:**
- There must be at least a 24-hour interval from the end of one shift to the start of the next shift assigned to the same worker.
- *Clarification:* The interval is measured from the actual end time of one shift to the start time of the next shift for the same worker.
- *Cross-Month Application:* When scheduling a new month, historical assignments from the end of the previous scheduling window must be loaded to enforce the 24-hour interval for shifts at the beginning of the new window.
- *Examples:*
   - N (20:00–08:00) → next-day M1/M2/N is allowed (≥24h rest).
   - M1 (08:00–20:00) → next-day N (20:00–08:00) is allowed (exactly 24h rest).
   - M1 (08:00–20:00) → next-day M1/M2 is not allowed (12–15h rest).

**Night Shift Restrictions:**
- Workers who cannot work nights must never be assigned the night shift (N).

**Daily Shift Exclusions:**
- The same worker cannot be assigned more than one shift on the same day.

**Weekly Participation:**
- All workers who have at least one available weekday (Monday to Friday) in a given ISO week must be assigned at least one shift during that ISO week.
- *Clarification:* Workers with zero weekday availability are exempt from weekly participation, but may still be assigned weekend shifts if needed to satisfy critical rules.

**Weekday Shift Distribution:**
- On weekdays (Monday to Friday), ensure that all workers with at least one available weekday in the ISO week are assigned at least one weekday shift before any worker is assigned a second weekday shift in that ISO week.
- *Clarification:* Holidays that fall on weekdays are treated as weekdays (a shift on a holiday satisfies the "at least one weekday shift" requirement).

**Infeasibility Handling:**
- If critical rules cannot be satisfied (e.g., insufficient available workers), the solver reports the instance as infeasible rather than violating critical rules. Flexible rules may be relaxed, but critical rules must always hold.

## Flexible Rules (In Order of Importance)
These rules should be satisfied as much as possible, in the order listed, but may be compromised if necessary to meet the critical rules:

1. **Saturday Priority for First Shift:**
   - Priority should be given to assigning each worker's first shift of the ISO week on a weekday (Monday to Friday), even if it's a holiday. If this is not possible for some workers, prioritize assigning them a Saturday instead of Sunday, and a M1 or M2 shift instead of a N shift, as their first shift.
   - **Important:** During three-day weekends (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday), the Saturday/Sunday penalties are **suspended** to avoid conflicting with the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization" rule (#2). Workers whose first shift falls on a Saturday or Sunday during a 3-day weekend receive no penalty, allowing the optimizer to freely concentrate shifts to fewer workers.
   - *Fallback Order (highest to lowest):*
      1) Weekday day shift (M1/M2), even if it's a holiday.
      2) Weekday night shift (N), even if it's a holiday.
      3) Saturday day shift (M1/M2).
      4) Saturday night shift (N).
      5) Sunday day shift (M1/M2).
      6) Sunday night shift (N).

2. **Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization:**
   - When a holiday on a Monday or Friday creates a three-day weekend (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday), prioritize minimizing the number of different workers assigned shifts over those three days by favoring multiple shifts to the same worker, provided the 24-hour interval between shifts is respected.
   - *Clarification:* The goal is to minimize the number of *unique* workers assigned to the 3-day period. Fewer workers is better. Ideally, one worker covers as much as possible if legal.
   - *Cross-Month Application:* This rule applies even when the three-day weekend spans two calendar months (e.g., Saturday the 30th, Sunday the 31st, and a Monday holiday on the 1st of the next month; or a Friday holiday on the 31st followed by Saturday the 1st and Sunday the 2nd). When scheduling the earlier month, if the following month's 1st is a known holiday on Monday, the optimizer should consider the full three-day period. Similarly, when scheduling the later month, historical assignments from the preceding weekend days (already scheduled in the previous month's run) must be loaded and factored into minimizing unique workers for the three-day period.

3. **Weekend Shift Limits:**
   - Avoid assigning the same worker two shifts in the same weekend (Saturday and Sunday), even if "Shift Intervals" is not broken.
   - **Important:** This rule is **completely disabled** for any weekend that is part of a three-day weekend (Friday-Saturday-Sunday or Saturday-Sunday-Monday due to a holiday). When a three-day weekend exists, the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization" rule (#2) takes precedence, and this rule does not apply at all to that weekend. This ensures the optimizer can freely assign multiple shifts to the same worker to minimize the total number of unique workers working the three-day period.
   - *Cross-Month Application:* When a weekend spans two calendar months (e.g., Saturday the 31st and Sunday the 1st), this rule still applies (unless it's a three-day weekend). When scheduling the later month, historical assignments from the Saturday (already scheduled in the previous month's run) must be loaded to enforce this limit.

4. **Consecutive Weekend Shift Avoidance:**
   - Avoid assigning a worker shifts on consecutive weekends if there are other workers who have not yet worked a weekend shift in that month.
   - *Clarification:* "In that month" refers strictly to the current calendar month being scheduled. However, the check for "consecutive" must look back at the last weekend of the previous month/week to determine if the current weekend is consecutive.

5. **Consecutive Shifts:**
   - Aim to schedule shifts such that the time interval between the end of one shift and the start of the next shift for the same worker is greater than 48 hours, whenever this does not conflict with any critical rules or higher-priority flexible rules (like the "Three-Day Weekend Worker Minimization").
   - *Cross-Month Application:* When scheduling a new month, historical assignments from the end of the previous month must be considered to compute the interval to the first shift in the new scheduling window.

6. **Night Shift Minimum Interval:**
   - Avoid scheduling night shifts with 48 hours or less between them (measured start-to-start). If a worker does a night shift on day 1, they should not do another night shift on day 3 or sooner.
   - *Clarification:* The interval is measured from the start time of one night shift to the start time of the next night shift for the same worker. This applies to all night shifts, including those in three-day weekends.
   - *Example:* Night shift on Monday 20:00 → next night shift should be no earlier than Thursday 20:00 (96h later) to fully avoid penalty, or at least after Wednesday 20:00 (48h) to partially reduce the penalty.

7. **Consecutive Night Shift Avoidance:**
   - When a worker is assigned a night shift, avoid having their next assigned shift also be a night shift. The goal is to prevent "night-to-night" sequences where a worker's shifts alternate between nights without any day shifts in between.
   - *Clarification:* This rule applies regardless of the number of days between the shifts. If a worker does a night shift on Monday and their next shift is on Thursday, that Thursday shift should preferably NOT be a night shift.
   - *Penalty Reduction:* The penalty is reduced if the start times of the two consecutive night shifts are separated by at least 96 hours (4 days). This allows for longer rest periods to partially compensate for back-to-back night assignments.
   - *Example:* Worker does N on Monday (20:00) → next shift on Wednesday should be M1 or M2, not N. If it must be N, having it on Friday (96h+ later) is better than Thursday (72h later).

8. **Shift Equity:**
   - Shifts should be distributed equitably among workers over the year, with different shift types having different equity priority (higher priority = more important to balance first).
   - *Equity Priority Order (highest to lowest):*
      1) Sunday or Holiday M2
      2) Saturday N
      3) Saturday M2
      4) Sunday or Holiday N (holidays on Saturday excluded—see below)
      5) Sunday or Holiday M1
      6) Saturday M1
      7) Weekday N (all Mon-Fri nights combined, to balance total night burden)
      8) Friday N
      9) Weekday (not Friday) N
      10) Monday M1 or M2
      11) Weekday (not Monday) M1 or M2

   - *Holiday Counting Rules for Equity:*
      - Holiday on Saturday: M1/M2 count as Holiday M1/M2; N counts as Saturday N (not double-counted).
      - Holiday on Sunday: counts in the "Sunday or Holiday" category.
      - Holiday on a weekday (Mon–Fri): counts in the "Sunday or Holiday" category for equity purposes.
   - *Clarification:* Equity metrics are computed over the entire year-to-date, incorporating historical assignments from previous months.

9. **M2 Priority:**
   - Prioritize M2 shifts over M1 shifts for workers with a standard weekly load of 18 hours to minimize overtime over the long term (one year of scheduling).
   - *Clarification:* Prefer assigning M2 over M1 to workers with an 18-hour weekly load when both are feasible. This does not prohibit assigning M2 to 12-hour workers, especially when needed to satisfy critical rules.

10. **Monthly Shift Balance:**
   - Prevent extreme imbalances in total shift counts within a single scheduled month, even when long-term category equity would otherwise cause it.
   - *Rationale:* Category-specific equity objectives (e.g., balancing Saturday nights, holiday M2s) could inadvertently cause one worker to receive many more total shifts than others in a single month—for example, if a worker needs "catch-up" assignments in multiple categories simultaneously.
   - *Implementation:* The scheduler penalizes the difference between the worker with the most total shifts and the worker with the fewest total shifts in the scheduling period.
   - *Priority:* This objective sits between weekend/holiday equity (higher priority) and weekday equity (lower priority), with a default weight of 5000. This ensures premium shift fairness takes precedence, but monthly totals remain reasonably balanced.
   - *Tuning:* The weight can be adjusted in `constants.py` via `MONTHLY_SHIFT_BALANCE_WEIGHT`:
      - Increase (e.g., 8000) for stricter monthly balance at the cost of some long-term category equity
      - Decrease (e.g., 2000) for more flexibility in pursuing long-term category equity
      - Recommended range: 2000–8000

11. **Weekend Definition for Behavioral Rules:**
   - For rules such as **Weekend Shift Limits** (#3) and **Consecutive Weekend Shift Avoidance** (#4), only actual weekends (Saturday and Sunday) are considered "weekend."
   - Holidays falling on weekdays (Monday–Friday) do NOT count as weekend for these behavioral rules—they only affect equity tracking (#8).

## Extended Absence Handling

**Automatic Equity Credits for Extended Absences:**
When workers are absent for extended periods (medical leave, parental leave, prolonged vacations), their equity stat counts fall behind other workers. Without adjustment, the scheduler would try to "catch up" these workers by assigning them more undesirable shifts upon return, which is unfair to workers who covered during the absence.

**Automatic Detection and Credit Application:**
The scheduler automatically detects workers with 3 or more consecutive weeks of full unavailability and applies equity credits to compensate:

- **Detection Criteria:** A worker is considered to have an "extended absence" if they have 3+ consecutive ISO weeks where all 5 weekdays (Monday-Friday) are marked as unavailable.
- **Automatic Credits:** Credits are calculated based on the number of consecutive weeks absent, approximating what shifts the worker would have been assigned if available.
- **No Manual Intervention Required:** Simply mark the worker as unavailable for the extended period, and the system handles the rest.

**How It Works:**
1. Before schedule generation, the system scans each worker's unavailability data
2. If 3+ consecutive weeks of full weekday unavailability are detected, credits are automatically calculated:
   - ~1 credit per 15 weeks for Saturday/Sunday/Holiday shifts (sat_n, sun_holiday_m2, etc.)
   - ~1 credit per 5 weeks for night shifts (fri_night, weekday_not_fri_n)
   - ~1 credit per 2 weeks for common weekday shifts (weekday_not_mon_day)
3. Credits are added to the worker's apparent past stats during optimization
4. This prevents the scheduler from over-assigning undesirable shifts to "catch up"

**Example:**
Sofia goes on 4-week parental leave (marked unavailable Mon-Fri for 4 consecutive weeks):
- System automatically detects the extended absence
- Applies credits: sat_n=0, weekday_not_mon_day=2, etc.
- When Sofia returns, she won't be overloaded with Saturday nights or holiday shifts

**Manual Override:**
Administrators can still manually set or adjust credits via SchedulerService if the automatic calculation needs fine-tuning:
```python
scheduler.set_worker_equity_credit("Sofia", "sat_n", 1)  # Add 1 Saturday night credit
scheduler.clear_worker_equity_credits("Sofia")  # Clear all manual credits for worker
```

**Configuration Persistence:**
Manual equity credit overrides are saved in `config.yaml` under the `equity_credits` key and persist across sessions. Automatic credits are computed fresh each time based on current unavailability data.


**Data Schema Recommendations:**
- Worker: { id, name, weekly_load: 12|18, can_night: bool, unavailable_dates: Set[YYYY-MM-DD] }
- Shift: { date: YYYY-MM-DD, type: M1|M2|N, start: HH:MM, end: HH:MM }
- History: keyed by (iso_year, iso_week), storing assigned shifts per day and per worker, plus weekly hour totals, overtime, and undertime.
